---

layout: page
title: CV
permalink: /CV/
headerInclude: true
---

## Curriculum Vitae --- Dr. Joel Klassen

### Employment
2019 - Present: **Senior Quantum Scientist**, Phasecraft Ltd., London UK

2017 - 2019: **Postdoctoral Researcher**, Terhal group, QuTech, TU Delft. 

### Education

2013-2017: **PhD - Physics**, The University of Guelph in association with the Institute for Quantum Computing. Thesis: Uniqueness and Existence in the Quantum Marginal Problem.

2012-2013: **Masters of Science (Transferred to PHD) - Physics**, The University of Guelph in association with the Institute for Quantum Computing. 

2005-2011: **Bachelor of Science, Honours - Physics**, Simon Fraser University.

### Refereed Publications

2021: Charles Derby, Joel Klassen, Johannes Bausch, Toby Cubitt [**Compact fermion to qubit mappings**](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.06939) *Physical Review B*

2020: Joel Klassen, Milad Marvian, et al. [**Hardness and ease of curing the sign problem for two-local qubit  Hamiltonians**](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08800v2) *SIAM Journal on Computing*

2019: Joel Klassen, Barbara Terhal, [**Two-local qubit Hamiltonians: when are they stoquastic?**](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05405) *Quantum*

2017: Tao Xin, Dawei Lu, Joel Klassen et. al., [**Quantum State Tomography via Reduced Density Matrices**](https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.02046), *Phys. Rev. Lett.* 

2015: Joel Klassen, Xiao-Gang Wen, [**Topological degeneracy (majorana zero-mode) and 1+1d fermionic topological order in a magnetic chain on superconductor via spontaneous Z<sub>2 </sub><sup>f</sup> symmetry breaking**](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.5985), *Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter*

2013: Joel Klassen, Jianxin Chen, and Bei Zeng, [**Universal Entanglers for Bosonic and Fermionic Systems.**](https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.7489) *8th Conference on the Theory of Quantum Computation, Communication and Cryptography (TQC 2013), Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs)*

### Preprints

2022: Riley Chien, Joel Klassen, [**Optimizing fermionic encodings for both Hamiltonian and hardware**](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05652)

2022: L Clinton et al. [**Towards near-term quantum simulation of materials**](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.15256)

2021: Clinton, Bausch, Klassen, Cubitt [**Phase Estimation of Local Hamiltonians on NISQ Hardware**](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.13584)

2020:  M Ioannou et al. [**Sign-curing local Hamiltonians: Termwise versus global stoquasticity and the use of Clifford transformations**](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.11964)

### Talks

2019/2018: **When is a Hamiltonian Stoquastic?**, TU Delft, MIT, **QIP 2019**, QuSoft, Leiden Work-shop Mathematics of QIT.

2017/2016: **An Introduction to the Quantum Marginal Problem**, TU Delft, Oxford, ICFO

2016: **Quantum State Tomography via Reduced Density Matrices**, FU Berlin, RWTH Aachen, IQC, University of Guelph, Oxford.

2015: **The Symmetric Extendibility Problem**, IQC

2014: **What is a Quantum Fluctuation?**, IQC

2014: **New Directions in Pure Symmetric Extendibility**, University of Guelph.

2014: **Universal Entanglers for Bosonic and Fermionic Systems**, IQC.

### Posters
2018: **Two local qubit Hamiltonians: when are they stoquastic?**, Discrete Phase Space Methods for Quantum Fault-Tolerance, Cologne.

2016/2015: **The Symmetric Extendability Problem, and a General Test for Pure Symmetric Extendability.** , The 11th Conference on the Theory of Quantum Computation, Communication and Cryptography, FU Berlin --- Reduced Density Matrices in Quantum Physics and Role of Fermionic Exchange Symmetry, Oxford --- Workshop on Quantum Marginals and Numerical Ranges, University of Guelph.
	
### Organizing Committees
2018: **Fysica 2018**, Utrecht University.

2017-2018: **QIP 2018**, TU Delft.

2016: **Mini Workshop on Quantum Information**, The University of Guelph.

2015: **Workshop on Quantum Marginals and Numerical Ranges**, Web Admin, The University of Guelph.

2014: **The 11th Annula Canadian Quantum Information Student Conference**, The University of Guelph.

### Awards
2016-2017: **Ontario Graduate Scholarship**, $15000.

2015-2016: **Ontario Graduate Scholarsip**, $15000.

2014: **Queen Elizabeth II Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology**, $5000.

2012-2017: **Dean's Scholarship**

### Teaching
2019: **Lecturer**, *Quantum Information Theory*, TU Delft

2018-2019: **Co-Supervisor**, *Masters Student: Marios Ioannou*, TU Delft.

2018: **Teaching Assistant**, *Quantum Hardware*, TU Delft.

2012-2017: **Teaching Assistant**, University of Guelph.

### Outreach
2019: **BEST Delft, Guest Lecture**, A Gentle Introduction to Quantum Computing, TU Delft.

2016: **Our Quantum World Blog**, Blog Post - Tomography turns out to be harder than expected, IQC

2015: **Our Quantum World Blog**, Blog Post - On Weirdness, IQC.

2015: **Canadian Association of Girls in Science**, Volunteer Educator, IQC

2013: **Brainstem**, Volunteer Educator, The Perimeter Institute.